---
date: 2025-11-17
updated: 2025-11-23
tags:
  - university
  - psych/big-problem
class:
  - note
source:
  - "[[Big Problems Paper Outline]]"
related:
author:
  - Ewan Pedersen
description:
abstract:
---

## Introduction

While the modern information age has brought mass connection and productivity never seen before, it has fundamentally altered the base environment that our brains have grown exceptionally adapted to. This novel environment, one where every interaction, thought, and task passes through the medium of a digital interface. Particularly, there has been a shift in how humans(specifically the youth) consume information, socialize, and entertain themselves - all through screens. This shift to a life characterized by mediation of computer infrastructure(both societal and individual), has drastically altered the methods in which humans learn, focus, and interact. Novel emerging evidence suggests a possibility that digital technology alters attention spans, motivation, and even cognitive architecture, particularly as screen based behavior replaces our more traditional sustained engagement model. Is this something that should be of concern? Or simply another natural evolution of the human mind adapting to new tools? Are the rapid speed-ups in both our productivity and entertainment consumption responsible for our waning attention spans? This paper explores the effects of the digital paradigm shift on human cognition, and how it has been restructured by fragmenting attention and an altered motivation. We seek to evaluate using executive function and boredom-avoidance theories to explain its development, and proposing cognitive engagement/self regulartion as a potentional solution. But beyond the modern day effects, we must also consider how this generation will evolve in the future, and what it means for the human mind.

## Attention Fragmentation

The most obvious observation of the digital paradigm shift is the decrease of attention spans, both in children and adults. The average human now consumes information in bite sized chunks, rapidly switching between tasks and media sources. This has deeply encouraged a culture of multitasking, where people attempt to track several sources of information at once, often at the expense of deep focus and sustained attention. This correlates with the rise of short-form digital content, namely TikTok videos, Instagram reels, and Twitter posts. These short form platforms are for the rapid capturing of attention, and often lack depth. A possible source for this cognitive shift can be traced to early childhood. Bal et al. (2024) compiled a systematic review, reavealing that the excessive usage of screens in early life has a strong effect on their executive functions, namely planning, inhibition, and working memory. These executive functions are controlled by the prefrontal cortex, which undergoes critical development during early childhood—a period when neural pathways are particularly malleable and susceptible to environmental shaping. An early overexposure of this sort to passive media yields a reduction in real-world engagement and language development, forming cognitive habits of short-term attention that persist into adulthood. This is of particular concern, as the early establishment of these cognitive patterns predisposes individuals to the fragmented attention and boredom susceptibility observed in adults. The implications are profound: the digital environment is reshaping cognitive processes from childhood, with consequences that persist throughout life. As children raised on screens mature, their early habits evolve into adult patterns of digital mass consumption - leading to novel forms of attention fatigue and boredom.

## High Frequency Switching

But how does this fragmented attention manifest behaviorally in adults? The devices and software in question have been around long enough for us to observe how these childhood cognitive patterns translate into adult behavior. There seems to be a paradoxical relationship between digital multitasking and boredom. Adults have turned to rapid media switching as a strategy to avoid boredom, yet this very behavior appears to exacerbate feelings of boredom and dissatisfaction. This phenomenon can be understood through the lens of attention regulation and the dopamine reward system. Tam and Inzlicht (2024) carried out a series of experiments, demonstrtating that individuals who frequently "switch" between digital media report higher levels of boredom and lower satisfaction with their activities. This research suggest that a constant need for seeking novel experience was encouraged by digital platforms, and thus lead to a fragmented attention span, which in turn diminishes the ability to engage deeply with any single task or activity. This presents something the researchers are calling the "boredom paradox": the very strategies employed to mitigate boredom through rapid switching ultimately lead to greater boredom due to weakened attention regulation. The dopamine reward system, which reinforces behaviors that provide immediate gratification, may play a role in this cycle, as individuals become conditioned to seek out constant novelty at the expense of sustained engagement. Similar to tolerance development in substance dependence, the brain's reward threshold rises with repeated exposure, requiring increasingly novel stimuli to achieve the same level of engagement (Sharpe & Spooner, 2025). However, the question remains: if digital multitasking undermines attention, are there ways to use technology that enhance rather than degrade cognitive control?

## Disspraportionate Effects on Different Populations

Before proposing solutions, it has yet to be considered how diversity factors such as socioeconomic status, culture, and access to technology influence the development of our big problem. Up to this point, the assumption has been that everyone has had equitable access to digital technology and that its effects are uniform across populations. However, this is not the case. **Bal et al. (2024)** found that children from higher socioeconomic status (SES) families tend to have better-managed screen time and more structured digital engagement, which mitigates some of the negative cognitive effects associated with excessive screen exposure. In contrast, children from lower SES backgrounds often experience unregulated screen time, leading to greater impairments in executive function. This disparity suggests that parental education, resources for alternative activities, and access to high-quality educational content create protective factors that are unequally distributed across social classes. The existense of these differences may imply that the digital paradigm has a nonuniform impact - namely that we must consider equitable solutions that address access and education as much as cognitive retraining.

## Possibility of Benefits

Given all the dangers posed by this paradigm shift, are there ways we can harness it to amplify our cognitive output instead of hindering it? A promising avenue comes from a philosophy of "use it or lose it" cognitive training, which suggests that engaging executive function systems through purposeful computer use may enhance cognitive resilience. **Tun and Lachman (2010)** found in their cross-sectional study (involving 2671 adults aged 32 to 84) that users of computer/interenet devices performed better on certain executive function tasks, compared to that of their infrequent counterparts, even after controlling for possible variables like age and education. This could suggest that the regular engagement with computers can serve as a method for cognitive exercise, reinforcing the executive functions like working memory, cognitive flexibility, and inhibition control. While this is purely a correlational study and thus cannot prove causation, it suggests a possibility remains that the intentional and meaningful use of computers could counteract some of the negative effects involved with fragmented attention. However, it is worth a note that this study is from 2010, when computer use primarily involved tasks like email, word processing, and information searches—quite different from today's algorithm-driven social media platforms designed for the explicit purpose of maximum attention capture and fragmentation. This study reframes technology not as inherently harmful but as a potential cognitive training tool when used intentionally. (Alternative percepective to papers position thus far.) We must consider the possiblity that intentional, meaningful computer use may thus form the foundation for behavioral solutions like digital mindfulness and structured focus.

## Solution Applications

Given the likely risks versus potential benefits, how can solutions be implemented for the mitigation of the negative cognitive effects from the digital paradigm, while still enhancing its benefits? Is there necessarily a "correct" or safe way to engage with digital technology? The research by Tam and Inzlicht (2024) highlighted a framework in which individuals might go about restructuring their engagement with the digital world to reduce boredom while retaining satisfaction. By retraining attention through methods like mindfulness practices and encouraging deeper engagement with content, individuals could counteract the fragmented attention patterns fostered by rapid media switching. The strategies proposed primarily revolved changing what kind of content you consume. Making the decision between a short form video on some dramatic event vs reading/watching a long form piece that requires sustained attention. This shift towards depth over speed may help rebuild attention regulation and reduce the boredom paradox by allowing sustained engagement to trigger reward pathways rather than relying on rapid novelty-seeking. This mix allows you to keep novelty of near instant content access, while also training the brain to sustain focus for longer periods. These varied approaches lead towards a balance where we leverage our digital tools for cognitive stimulation while also practicing self regulation to mitigate the known affects and attention fragmentation.

## Conclusion

How the digital revolution has transformed societal communication (social media, work environments, global politics) and the individual through its affects on cognition itself. By seeking to understand the psychological mechanisms - executive function, attention regulation, and reward processing, we can move toward a model of _intentional digital engagement_: one that enhances rather than erodes the mind.

## References

Tun, P. A., & Lachman, M. E. (2010). The Association Between Computer Use and Cognition Across Adulthood: Use It So You Won’t Lose It? _Psychology and Aging_, _25_(3), 560–568. [https://doi.org/10.1037/a0019543](https://doi.org/10.1037/a0019543)

Bal, M., Kara Aydemir, A. G., Tepetaş Cengiz, G. Ş., & Altındağ, A. (2024). Examining the relationship between language development, executive function, and screen time: A systematic review. _PloS One_, _19_(12), e0314540-. [https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314540](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0314540)

Tam, K. Y. Y., & Inzlicht, M. (2024). Fast-Forward to Boredom: How Switching Behavior on Digital Media Makes People More Bored. _Journal of Experimental Psychology. General_, _153_(10), 2409–2426. [https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0001639](https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0001639)

Sharpe, B., & Spooner, R. (2025). Dopamine-scrolling: A modern public health challenge requiring urgent attention. _Perspectives in Public Health_, _145_(4), 190–191. [https://doi.org/10.1177/17579139251331914](https://doi.org/10.1177/17579139251331914)
