---
date: 2024-12-03
tags:
  - math
---

The Divergence Theorem gives us a method for computing the outward flux of $\vec{F}$ through a **closed** surface $S$.

Recall the **flux form of Green's Theorem** (end of sec. 16.5):

$$
\oint_{\partial \mathcal{D}} \vec{F} \cdot \vec{n} \ ds = \int \int _{\mathcal{D}} div(\vec{F}) \ dA
$$

Where the $Flux \ across \ boundary = Sum \ of \ Flux \ throughout \ region$

In the flux form of Green's Theorem, $\vec{F}$ is a vector field on $\mathbb{R}^2$ and $\mathcal{D}$ is a flat surface. The divergence theorem extends this concept to vector fields on $\mathbb{R}^3$ and non-flat surface. Intuitively, we can arrive at this result by "increasing the dimension" of the flux form of Green's Theorem by one: the line integral becomes a surface integral, and the double integral becomes a triple integral.

> [!Warning] Divergence Theorem
> Let $E$ be a simple solid region and let $S$ be the boundary surface of $E$. Then:
> 
> $$
> \int \int_{S} \vec{F} \cdot d\vec{S} = \int \int_{E} \int div (\vec{F}) \ dV
> $$

Where the **flux through the boundary** is equal to the **total flux throughout the region.**

> [!Abstract] Remarks
> 1. A "simple" region in $\mathbb{R}^3$ is simultaneously Type I, II, and III. A similar condition was required for Green's Theorem.
> 2. **The moral of the divergence theorem** is that we can compute the flux through $S$ by evaluating a triple integral. Oftentimes, the latter computation is easier.

We will have a look at a basic example, and then prove the theorem.

---

## Example

